======================================================

The Maximum Integrated Data Acquisition System (MIDAS)
 
                Stefan Ritt, September 97

======================================================


Overview 
--------

The MIDAS data acquisition system has been developed for small and
medium scale experiments in nuclear and particle physics. It supports
event based data acquisition as well as monitoring continous data
streams. The complexity ranges from test systems, where a single PC is
connected to CAMAC via a PC-CAMAC interface, to experiments with
several front-end computers and analysis workstations. The system
currently runs under Windows NT, UNIX, VMS, VxWorks and MS-DOS and can
be ported easily to any operating system which supports TCP/IP
sockets. A speed optimized RPC layer is used for data exchange, with
which sustained data rates of 980kB/sec. over standard ethernet can be
achieved. An integrated slow control system contains a fast online
database and a history system. Drivers exist for CAMAC, VME, Fastbus,
High Voltage Crates, GBIB and several PC plug-in DAQ boards. A
framework is supplied which can be extended by user code for front-end
readout on one side and data analysis on the other side.  The online
data can be presented by PAW as histograms and N-tuples. A run control
program has been written as a user interface to the data acquisition
and to the slow control system. The system was successfully used in
several experiments at PSI and at TRIUMF.

Components
----------

The MIDAS system consists of a set of library functions and
applications. The library is designed in two layers. The lower layer
covers all operating system dependent calls, mainly shared memory
access and semaphore operations. The upper layer is entirely operating
system independent. Since the lower layer only contains 7% of the
code, porting the library to a different operating system is fairly
easy. The MIDAS library contains routines for buffer management, a
message system, a history system and an online database. MIDAS buffers
are FIFOs (first-in, firsto-out) which support multiple producers and
multiple consumers. Consumers may request a certain subset of event
types from a buffer. They can also specify wether they want to
receive all events of a given type or only as many as they can process
without blocking the producers. A watchdog scheme has been designed
which removes crashed clients from a buffer so as not to block the
whole system. The transfer speed between a producer and a consumer is
on the order of 10MB/sec for local access and 980kB/sec for remote
access over standard ethernet. 

The history system is used to store data on a hard disk and produce
value-over-time plots. It is capable of storing several thousand
events per second and of changing the event definition during an
experiment.  The online database is a central data storage which
contains all variables of an experiment like logging channel
information, event definitions, slow control variables, front-end
parameters and histogram definitions. It is kept entirelyin shared
memory for fastest access of up to 50,000 read/writes per second
locally and 500 read/writes remotely. The online database is
hierarchically structured, similar to a file system, with directories
and sub-directories. The data is stored in key/data pairs, where a key
corresponds to a file name and the data to the file contents. Keys can
be created and deleted dynamically during runtime. A client can
register a "hot-link" of a local C-structure to a sub-tree in the
online database. Whenever a value in the sub-tree is changed by
someone else, the client C-structure automatically receives an update
of the changed data. This scheme makes it very easy to dynamically
control the behavior of front-end programs and analyzers.

The slow control system is also based on this principle. Whenever a
demand value is changed in the online database, the slow control
front-end receives an update and can propagate it to the proper
hardware via a device driver. An image of the whole database contents
can be written to the logging channels to reflect the current status
of an experiment.  Several applications have been written using the
MIDAS library. A general purpose logger supports multiple logging
channels to disks and tapes. Different logging channels can receive
different types of events in different formats. Currently three data
formats are supported: ASCII, an optimized MIDAS format and the YBOS
format. A command-line based editor has been created which can be used
to change values in the online database interactively and to perform
run control. A graphical implementation of that program implemented in
Java is under construction. This makes it possible to control an
experiment from any computer running a Java capable browser. 

The MIDAS data acquisition system has been used successfully at the
Pion-Beta experiment at PSI, Switzerland. Two PCs were used as
front-end computers connected to CAMAC, Fastbus and a LeCroy LRS1440
high voltage system. Several PC plug-in cards were used to read
temperatures and gas flows. Two additional PCs were used as back-end
computers running different analyzers under Windows NT. Data was
written to two DLT tape units in parallel. 
